feat(data): add docs for CRUD operations between Storage files and GraphQL API records (#5503)
aws-amplify/docs: src/fragments/lib/graphqlapi/js/working-with-files.mdx

  query: mutations.updateSong,
  variables: { input: songDetails },
});

``` 

</Block>
<Block name="JavaScript">

```js
// TODO: add after PM feedback
```

</Block>
</BlockSwitcher>

## Query a record and retrieve the associated file

To retrieve the file associated with a record, first query the record, then use Storage to get the signed URL. The signed URL can then be used to download the file, display an image, etc:

<BlockSwitcher>
<Block name="TypeScript">

```ts
// Query the record to get the file key:
const response = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<GetSongQuery>>({
    query: queries.getSong,
    variables: { id: currentSong.id },
  });
const _song = response.data?.getSong;

// Check that the record has an associated image:
if (!_song?.coverArtKey) return;

// Retrieve the signed URL:
const signedURL = await Storage.get(_song?.coverArtKey);
``` 

</Block>
<Block name="JavaScript">

```js
// TODO: add after PM feedback
```

</Block>
</BlockSwitcher>

## Delete and remove files associated with API records
There are three primary deletion workflows when working with Storage files and the GraphQL API:

1. Remove the file association, continue to persist both file and record.

> 2. Remove the record association, and delete the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Remove the record association and delete the file.
```

2. Delete both file and record.

### Remove the file association, continue to persist both file and record

The following example removes the file association from the record, but does not delete the file from S3, nor the record from the database.

<BlockSwitcher>
<Block name="TypeScript">

```ts
const response = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<GetSongQuery>>({
    query: queries.getSong,
    variables: { id: currentSong.id },
  });

const _song = response?.data?.getSong;

if (!_song?.coverArtKey) return;

const songDetails: UpdateSongInput = {
  id: _song.id,
  coverArtKey: null,
};

const updatedSong = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<UpdateSongMutation>>({
  query: mutations.updateSong,
  variables: { input: songDetails },
});
``` 

</Block>
<Block name="JavaScript">

```js
// TODO: add after PM feedback
```

</Block>
</BlockSwitcher>

> ### Remove the record association, and delete the file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Remove the record association and delete the file
```

The following example removes the file from the record, then deletes the file from S3:

<BlockSwitcher>
<Block name="TypeScript">

```ts
const response = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<GetSongQuery>>({

>     query: queries.getSong,
>     variables: { id: currentSong.id },

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  query: queries.getSong,
  variables: { id: currentSong.id },
```

>   });

Reviewer: ```suggestion
});
```

const _song = response?.data?.getSong;

if (!_song?.coverArtKey) return;

const songDetails: UpdateSongInput = {
  id: _song.id,

>   coverArtKey: null,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  coverArtKey: null, // Set the file association to `null`
```

## Working with Files and Attachments:

> Many times you might want to create logical objects that have more complex data, such as images or videos, as part of their structure. For example, you might create a Person model with a profile picture, or a Post model that has an associated image. With Amplify's GraphQL API and Storage categories, you can reference the file / attachment within the model to associate the record with the file.

Reviewer 2: Let us remove the wording on complex here. I think that is confusing for customers, and makes it seem unattainable or difficult to implement.

Author: Just saw your comment, but I've already removed this. Thanks!

The Storage and GraphQL API categories can be used together to associate a file, such as an image or video, with a particular record. For example, you might create a `User` model with a profile picture, or a `Post` model with an associated image. With Amplify's GraphQL API and Storage categories, you can reference the file within the model itself to create an association.

> To get started, run the following in an existing Amplify project:

Reviewer 2: @renebrandel @david-mcafee  - do you want to use the fact that you can add the "api" category first with the Cognito user pool as an Auth method here to streamline the number of CLI commands?

Author: @abdallahshaban557 - in that case, we'd have to add instructions on adding auth. Telling them to run a single command with default configurations is simpler, IMO. @renebrandel?

```bash
npm i @aws-amplify/ui-react  #For Authenticator component
amplify add auth             #Select default configuration
amplify add storage          #Select S3 with read/write access
amplify add api              #Select Cognito User Pool for authorization type
```

> When prompted, use the following schema:

Reviewer 2: I think we should be a bit more specific that you should find your schema .graphql file, and where it is at - and update it.

Author: @abdallahshaban557 - I'm not absolutely opposed, but I was attempting to not re-explain items that are found elsewhere in the docs (such as in the `Getting Started` guides). Given that this isn't a separate tutorial, and is found in the context of our docs, I'm inclined to say no. However, it's a minor update, so I'm okay either way.

Reviewer 2: I would rather we mention it here IMO. It would make this section a lot clearer.

Author: I should also add that the CLI prompts you to open the file for editing, so this may be redundant.

Author: Added this in, marked as resolved

```graphql
type Song @model @auth(rules: [{ allow: public}]) {
  id: ID!
  name: String!

>   covertArtKey: String #Set as optional to allow adding file after initial create

Reviewer 3: Should we clarify here the "how" something is set as optional? Something like: 
"Set as optional by leaving out the trailing '!' to allow adding file after initial create"

Author: Because this isn't a standalone tutorial and is in the context of our other docs, I try to refrain from going into too much unrelated detail that would clutter the examples / explanations. If the customer needs more details on creating / modifying a schema, my assumption is that they will visit the relevant docs pages. Since there is a required `name` field above this, it also seems fairly straightforward by doing a quick visual comparison.

>   covertArtKey: String #Set as optional to allow adding file after initial create

Reviewer 4: Typo: `covert` instead of `cover`

}
```

Save the schema and run `amplify push` to deploy the changes.

> To use files and attachments you need authorization credentials for reading and writing to Amazon S3, which `amplify add auth` configures in the default setting along with a Cognito User Pool.

Reviewer 2: I would pull this up right after the CLI commands - I think it would flow better that way

Author: Note: the wording here has been updated (see Ivan's suggestion), which is why this is marked as "outdated" - however, the placement is the same.

Reviewer 2: LGTM

> To use files and attachments you need authorization credentials for reading and writing to Amazon S3, which `amplify add auth` configures in the default setting along with a Cognito User Pool.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To use files and attachments your application needs authorization credentials for reading and writing to Amazon S3. This is configured in the `amplify add auth` step.
```

<Callout>

> The Storage and API categories govern data access based on their own authorization patterns. Adding an `@auth` directive to the API schema does not guard against access in the Storage category. When you run `amplify add storage`, the CLI will configure appropriate IAM policies on the bucket using a Cognito Identity Pool role. You will then have the option of adding CRUD (Create, Update, Read and Delete) based permissions as well, so that Authenticated and Guest users will be granted limited permissions within these levels. For more on configuring Storage authorization levels, see the [Storage documentation](https://docs.amplify.aws/lib/storage/configureaccess/q/platform/js/).

Reviewer 2: I am a little confused on this being here - what are you trying to prevent?

Reviewer 2: ok got it - thank you.

</Callout>

For more on configuring API authorization (separate from Storage authorization), see the [API documentation](https://docs.amplify.aws/lib/graphqlapi/authz/q/platform/js/).

<Callout>

For the complete working example, including required imports, obtaining the file from the user, and React component state management, see the [Complete Example](#complete-example) below.

</Callout>

## Create a record with an associated file

First upload the file to Storage, then run the following mutation with the GraphQL API to create a record and associate the file with the record.

<Callout>

> Note: In the case of adding a file to an existing record (such as when a user uploads a profile picture to an existing profile), first create the record and exclude the optional file reference, then follow the steps under [Add or update a file for an associated record](#add-or-update-a-file-for-an-associated-record) below.

Author: @cwomack - there are two ways to create a record with an associated file: 1) upload the Storage file, then create the API record with the file association, and 2) create the API record, upload the Storage file, then update the API record to create the association. I put the callout before the snippet because I would like to make it clear to the customer that there are two workflows, and I'd like to contain that guidance in one place. If we put this below the snippet, the customer may not clearly understand that there are two initial workflows.

};

const response = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<CreateSongMutation>>({
  query: mutations.createSong,
  variables: { input: songDetails },
});
``` 

</Block>
<Block name="JavaScript">

```js
const result = await Storage.put(file.name, file, {
  contentType: "image/png", // contentType is optional
});

const songDetails = {
  name: `My first song`,
  coverArtKey: result?.key,
};

const response = await API.graphql({
  query: mutations.createSong,
  variables: { input: songDetails },
});
```

</Block>
</BlockSwitcher>

## Add or update a file for an associated record

To associate a file with a record, update the record with the key returned by the Storage upload. The following example calls the helper function to upload the file using Storage, updates the record with the file's key, then retrieves the signed URL to download the image. If an image is already associated with the record, this will update the record with the new image:

<BlockSwitcher>
<Block name="TypeScript">

```ts
const result = await Storage.put(file.name, file, {
  contentType: "image/png", // contentType is optional
});

const songDetails: UpdateSongInput = {
  id: currentSong.id,

>   coverArtKey: key,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  coverArtKey: result?.key,
```

};

const updatedSong = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<UpdateSongMutation>>({
  query: mutations.updateSong,
  variables: { input: songDetails },
});

const signedURL = await Storage.get(updatedSong?.coverArtKey);
``` 

</Block>
<Block name="JavaScript">

```js
const result = await Storage.put(file.name, file, {
  contentType: "image/png", // contentType is optional
});

const songDetails: UpdateSongInput = {
  id: currentSong.id,

>   coverArtKey: key,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  coverArtKey: result?.key,
```

The Storage and GraphQL API categories can be used together to associate a file, such as an image or video, with a particular record. For example, you might create a `Person` model with a profile picture, or a `Post` model with an associated image. With Amplify's GraphQL API and Storage categories, you can reference the file within the model itself to create an association.

To get started, run the following in an existing Amplify project:

```bash
npm i @aws-amplify/ui-react  #For Authenticator component
amplify add auth             #Select default configuration
amplify add storage          #Select S3 with read/write access
amplify add api              #Select Cognito User Pool for authorization type
```

When prompted, use the following schema:

```graphql

> type Song @model {

Reviewer: For copy and paste-ability, let's just make sure the global auth rule is set or `@auth(rules: [{ allow: public }])`

  id: ID!
  name: String!
  covertArtKey: String
}
```

Save the schema and run `amplify push` to deploy the changes.

> To use files and attachments you need authorization credentials for reading and writing to Amazon S3, which `amplify add auth` configures in the default setting along with a Cognito User Pool. For more details on Storage / API authorization, see the [Configuring Authorization](#configuring-authorization) section below.

Reviewer: I think this callout needs to be worded stronger. Customers really need to understand that each category (storage + API) governs data access based on their own authZ patterns. We need to be explicit that "@auth rules" don't guard access in Storage / S3.

> For the complete working example, including required imports and React component state management, see the [Complete Example](#complete-example) below.

Reviewer: Love this.

> ## Creating a record with a GraphQL API

Reviewer: For SEO, we should make these titles more explicit to "API + Storage". Feedback applies to all H2 headings below.

For example: "Create a record with an attached file"

> Running the following mutation will create a record with the GraphQL API. The corresponding file will be associated with this record.

Reviewer: > The corresponding file will be associated with this record.

In the code snippets below you don't talk about the file just yet. So I think there's a bit of a disconnect here for the reader.

> <BlockSwitcher>

Reviewer: This example is maybe too minimal, as customer are able to get similar code snippets from other areas of our docs. I think we can expand the current section to "Create a record with an attached file". I.e. also show how to associate the file.

For the reader, we should answer the question: "What's Amplify's recommended guidance? Upload file first, then create record or vice versa?"

Author: To clarify - your suggestion is that we combine record creation, file upload, and file association with the record into a single function?

Reviewer: Into a single "section". Re: if in the same function, I think we should just develop an opinion that customers should generally follow. If we think diff functions are better then let's do that.

Author: Re: order of operations, it depends on the customer use-case. If, for instance, there is a situation where a created record will always have an initial file, then we should perform the upload, then the mutation. In a situation where the file may be added later (for instance, adding a profile picture after a profile has been created), then we would create the record, upload the file, then update the record. I'll call this out in the documentation to make it clear.

<Block name="TypeScript">

```ts
async function createSong() {
  const songDetails: CreateSongInput = {
    name: `My first song`,
  };

  try {
    const response = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<CreateSongMutation>>({
      query: mutations.createSong,
      variables: { input: songDetails },
    });
    setCurrentSong(response?.data?.createSong);
  } catch (error) {
    console.error("Error creating song: ", error);
  }
}
``` 

</Block>
<Block name="JavaScript">

```js
async function createSong() {
  const songDetails = {
    name: `My first song`,
  };

  try {
    const response = await API.graphql({
      query: mutations.createSong,
      variables: { input: songDetails },
    });
    setCurrentSong(response?.data?.createSong);
  } catch (error) {
    console.error("Error creating song: ", error);
  }
}
```

</Block>
</BlockSwitcher>

## Query the record with the GraphQL API

The following helper function will be used to retrieve the record from the GraphQL API in the examples below:

<BlockSwitcher>
<Block name="TypeScript">

```ts

> async function getSong() {

Reviewer: Expand code snippets based on feedback above.

  if (!currentSong) return;

  try {
    const oneSong = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<GetSongQuery>>({
      query: queries.getSong,
      variables: { id: currentSong.id },
    });

    return oneSong.data?.getSong;
  } catch (error) {
    console.error("Error retrieving song: ", error);
  }
}
``` 

</Block>
<Block name="JavaScript">

```js
async function getSong() {
  if (!currentSong) return;

  try {
    const oneSong = await API.graphql({
      query: queries.getSong,
      variables: { id: currentSong.id },
    });

    return oneSong.data?.getSong;
  } catch (error) {
    console.error("Error retrieving song: ", error);
  }
}
```

</Block>
</BlockSwitcher>

> ## Uploading the file to S3

Reviewer: Feedback attached above. Let's combine the snippets between Storage and API workflows and not separate it out. One recurring theme from customer conversations and that came up in the Discord office hours is "What's the sequence of events I should do for Storage + API, which one goes first? Is there guidance?"

Reviewer: Just want to make sure we answer that question "head-on"

Create a helper function that will handle uploading the file to S3:

<BlockSwitcher>
<Block name="TypeScript">

```ts
async function uploadImage(e: React.ChangeEvent<HTMLInputElement>) {
  if (!e.target.files) return;

  const file = e.target.files[0];

  try {
    const result = await Storage.put(file.name, file, {
      contentType: "image/png", // contentType is optional
    });

    return result?.key;
  } catch (error) {
    console.error("Error uploading image: ", error);
  }
}
``` 

</Block>
<Block name="JavaScript">

```js
async function uploadImage(e) {
  if (!e.target.files) return;

  const file = e.target.files[0];

  try {
    const result = await Storage.put(file.name, file, {
      contentType: "image/png", // contentType is optional
    });

    return result?.key;
  } catch (error) {
    console.error("Error uploading image: ", error);
  }
}
```

</Block>
</BlockSwitcher>

> ## Adding / updating an associated file

Reviewer: In the `meta.description`, the word "attachment" is used which is inconsistent with "associated". Let's just pick one and remain consistent. I prefer attached/attachment but not strongly opinionated.

Author: The reason I chose "file" / "association" over "attachment" / "attached" was because I didn't want to confuse customers regarding what was actually happening here. We are creating an association between the record and the file, which can be later updated, but there is otherwise no library logic that connects these two in any way (unlike the AppSync SDK, which was performing the upload), and I was concerned that "attachment" may imply that. My preference would be to stick with "file / association", if that works for you.

Reviewer: Cool. Let's then use association throughout.

  } catch (error) {
    console.error("Error adding image to song: ", error);
  }
}
```

</Block>
</BlockSwitcher>

## Retrieving the associated file from the record

To retrieve the file associated with a record, first query the record, then use Storage to get the signed URL. The signed URL can then be used to download the file, display an image, etc:

<BlockSwitcher>
<Block name="TypeScript">

```ts
async function getImageForCurrentSong() {
  // Query the record to get the file key:
  const _song = await getSong();
  // Check that the record has an associated image:
  if (!_song?.coverArtKey) return;
  // Retrieve the signed URL:
  const signedURL = await Storage.get(_song?.coverArtKey);
  setCurrentImageUrl(signedURL);
}
``` 

</Block>
<Block name="JavaScript">

```js
async function getImageForCurrentSong() {
  // Query the record to get the file key:
  const _song = await getSong();
  // Check that the record has an associated image:
  if (!_song?.coverArtKey) return;
  // Retrieve the signed URL:
  const signedURL = await Storage.get(_song?.coverArtKey);
  setCurrentImageUrl(signedURL);
}
```

</Block>
</BlockSwitcher>

## Deleting and removing associated files

> Once a file has been associated with a record, the file can be removed from the record, deleted from S3, or both.

Reviewer: I think this warrants a bit more expansion. To me it reads like "there are three primary deletion workflows to when working with files and GraphQL API."
1. Remove both record and attached files
2. Keep the record but detach and delete the attached file
3. Keep the file but remove the record

> ### Removing the file from the record

Reviewer: Just to stick to the terminology above. This should probably be something like:
### 1. Disassociate / Detach file from the record

    try {
      const deletedImage = await Storage.remove(currentSongImageKey);
      clearLocalState();
    } catch (error) {
      console.error("Error deleting image: ", error);
    }
  } catch (error) {
    console.error("Error deleting song: ", error);
  }
}
``` 

</Block>
<Block name="JavaScript">

```js
// Deletes current song. If song has an image, deletes image from Storage:
async function deleteCurrentSong() {
  if (!currentSong) return;

  const _song = await getSong();

  // Save the file key for deleting the file after the record is deleted:
  const currentSongImageKey = _song?.coverArtKey;

  const songDetails = {
    id: currentSong.id,
  };

  try {
    const deletedSong = await API.graphql({
      query: mutations.deleteSong,
      variables: { input: songDetails },
    });

    setCurrentSong(null);

    if (!currentSongImageKey) return;

    try {
      const deletedImage = await Storage.remove(currentSongImageKey);
      clearLocalState();
    } catch (error) {
      console.error("Error deleting image: ", error);
    }
  } catch (error) {
    console.error("Error deleting song: ", error);
  }
}
```

</Block>
</BlockSwitcher>

> ## Configuring authorization

Reviewer: I think re: my comment on the very top. This section can probably be collapsed into a warning that's at the very top of this page.
